.TH DYNOMITED 8 "2026-06-18" "v1.0.0"
.SH NAME
dynomited - a generic Dynamo implementation for different key/value storage engines (Rust port).
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B dynomited
is a distributed, Dynamo-style replication layer that fronts a per-node data store. It provides sharding and multi-data-center replication on a shared-nothing architecture with no single point of failure (SPOF), so the cluster stays available even when a server, rack, or entire data center goes offline.
.PP
The data store backing each node is selected by the
.B data_store
configuration key and may be one of three first-class backends:
.IP \[bu]
.B valkey
(alias
.BR redis ):
the Valkey / RESP wire protocol, vendor neutral.
.IP \[bu]
.B memcache :
the Memcached text protocol.
.IP \[bu]
.B dyniak :
the built-in Riak-compatible store (Riak PBC and HTTP surfaces, backed by an embedded noxu engine).
.PP
Client and inter-node traffic run over TCP or QUIC, on IPv4 or IPv6.
.PP
dynomited provides the following functionality:
.IP \[bu]
Multi-data-center (DC) replication
.IP \[bu]
Gossip-based cluster membership and topology discovery
.IP \[bu]
Tunable quorum reads and writes
.IP \[bu]
Hinted handoff for writes to temporarily unavailable peers
.IP \[bu]
Read repair on divergent replicas
.IP \[bu]
Active anti-entropy (Merkle-tree) reconciliation
.IP \[bu]
Shared-nothing architecture with symmetric nodes and no SPOF
.IP \[bu]
Data replication and consistent-hash sharding
.IP \[bu]
Observability via easily accessible statistics
.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdynomited\fR [\fB\-h\fR|\fB\-\-help\fR] [\fB\-V\fR|\fB\-\-version\fR] [\fB\-t\fR|\fB\-\-test\-conf\fR] [\fB\-d\fR|\fB\-\-daemonize\fR] [\fB\-D\fR|\fB\-\-describe\-stats\fR] [\fB\-v\fR|\fB\-\-verbosity\fR] [\fB\-o\fR|\fB\-\-output\fR] [\fB\-c\fR|\fB\-\-conf\-file\fR] [\fB\-p\fR|\fB\-\-pid\-file\fR] [\fB\-x\fR|\fB\-\-admin\-operation\fR] [\fB\-m\fR|\fB\-\-mbuf\-size\fR] [\fB\-M\fR|\fB\-\-max\-msgs\fR] [\fB\-g\fR|\fB\-\-gossip\fR] [\fB\-\-log\-format\fR] [\fB\-\-distribution\-shadow\fR] 

.ie \n(.g .ds Aq \(aq
.el .ds Aq '
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-h\fR, \fB\-\-help\fR
Show the help banner and exit
.TP
\fB\-V\fR, \fB\-\-version\fR
Show the version banner and exit
.TP
\fB\-t\fR, \fB\-\-test\-conf\fR
Validate the configuration file and exit
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-daemonize\fR
Daemonize: fork twice, become a session leader, redirect stdio to /dev/null
.TP
\fB\-D\fR, \fB\-\-describe\-stats\fR
Print the stats description and exit
.TP
\fB\-v\fR, \fB\-\-verbosity\fR \fI<N>\fR [default: 5]
Numeric verbosity. Values outside `0..=11` are rejected
.TP
\fB\-o\fR, \fB\-\-output\fR \fI<FILE>\fR
Path to the log output file. `None` keeps logs on standard error
.TP
\fB\-c\fR, \fB\-\-conf\-file\fR \fI<FILE>\fR [default: conf/dynomite.yml]
Path to the YAML configuration file
.TP
\fB\-p\fR, \fB\-\-pid\-file\fR \fI<FILE>\fR
Path to the pid file. `None` disables the pid file
.TP
\fB\-x\fR, \fB\-\-admin\-operation\fR \fI<N>\fR [default: 0]
Admin operation flag. `0` means "no admin override"
.TP
\fB\-m\fR, \fB\-\-mbuf\-size\fR \fI<N>\fR
Deprecated mbuf chunk size override
.TP
\fB\-M\fR, \fB\-\-max\-msgs\fR \fI<N>\fR
Deprecated maximum allocated messages override
.TP
\fB\-g\fR, \fB\-\-gossip\fR
Force\-enable gossip regardless of the YAML setting
.TP
\fB\-\-log\-format\fR \fI<FMT>\fR
Override the YAML `log_format:` knob. Accepts `default`, `rfc5424`, `rfc3164`, `json`, or `ndjson`
.TP
\fB\-\-distribution\-shadow\fR \fI<MODE>\fR
Run the dispatcher with a shadow distribution alongside the configured one. When set, every routing decision is computed under both the configured `distribution:` (the live route) and the shadow distribution; disagreements are counted on the `distribution_shadow_disagreement_total` metric. Useful for validating a migration before flipping the live distribution. Accepted values: `vnode`, `random_slicing`

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR memcached (8),
.BR valkey-server (1)
.br
.SH AUTHOR
Greg Burd <greg@burd.me> and contributors.
Project home: https://github.com/gburd/dynomite
